calls are growing louder in Israel for
the resignation of prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu and for an election
to be held many who were dissatisfied
before the war on Gaza began are even
more unhappy now with how the country is
being led so can Netanyahu be toppled
from what many say is his disastrous
leadership this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I'm Adrien
finigan he's the leader of Israel's war
of genocide in Gaza he's facing
increasing Israeli anger for failing to
bring captives home and he's also on
trial for fraud and bribery prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu is under
growing pressure both from politicians
within his own government and from world
leaders increasingly uneasy at the ever
Rising death doll and destruction in
Gaza he's long been a controversial
leader provoking months of mass protests
last year against his changes to weaken
the powers of the Supreme Court he's
facing similar protests now with
thousands rallying Nationwide on
Saturday to demand early elections
Netanyahu is dismissing the demands for
an election to be brought forward from
their scheduled date in 2026 so can he
resist the revolt against his leadership
and is he continuing the war in Gaza to
try to stay in power we'll be mulling
all of that and more with our guests in
just a moment but first Laura Khan
begins our
coverage Street confrontations between
Israeli police and protesters in Tel
Aviv and a rallying cry from thousands
angry about how prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu is conducting the war they
want him to resign like to say to the
government that you had your
time you ruined everything that you can
ruin now it's the time for the people to
correct all the things all the bad
things that you have done in the past 20
years
almost protest started at the outset of
Israel's war on Gaza with family members
of captives being held there demanding
the government prioritizes their release
over the military campaign but as
protests swalled demands shifted for the
country to hold early elections not
scheduled for another two years
but prime minister Netanyahu has not
changed his stance reiterating his
Mantra that the only solution is
military our policy is to liberate and
return captives through military
pressure we have brought back 120 of
them so far we will continue until all
of them are
released protests are now being backed
by trade unions powerful enough to grind
the economy to a standstill if their
demands are not met on Saturday the head
of the hit Union said Netanyahu took us
to the edge to a place where we should
not have been we at a dead end and
there's only one way out and that's
elections Netanyahu is also under legal
pressure on trial for fraud bribery and
breach of trust an opinion poll from the
Israeli democracy Institute shows
netanyahu's popularity is plummeting
with only 15% of Israelis wanting him to
stay in power there's a division two
within his own War cabinet rival Benny
Gant won almost twice the amount of
support in the same
poll Saturday's protest which was the
largest since Israel's war on Gaza
followed months of huge demonstrations
last year Israelis marched against
judicial reforms proposed by Netanyahu
and its hard-right Coalition the
so-called reasonableness standard bill
was passed in July after the opposition
boycotted the vote leading to yet more
anger on the
streets however this bill was nullified
by the Supreme Court in January
Netanyahu is also facing pressure
overseas the international court of
justice at the hag last month ordered
Israel to take immediate action to stop
acts of genocide in Gaza and months of
solidarity marches for Palestinians in
various cities including
London New
York and Mexico City all demanding an
immediate ceasefire and justice for
Palestine in Gaza Israel forces continue
their killing campaign obliterating
entire neighborhoods with air and
artillery strikes leaving No Escape for
Palestinians and leaving many
questioning whether the war is the only
thing keeping an increasingly unpopular
leader in power Laura Khan for Inside
Story Al jazer
[Music]
all right let's bring in our guests for
today's discussion from Tel Aviv we're
joined by Orin ziv a journalist and
commentator with plus 972 magazine
kalanu is just 50 kilom North of there
that's where tabat Abu Ras joins us from
he's the co-executive director of the
Abraham initiatives and a prominent
advocate for the rights of Arab Israelis
and also in Tel Aviv his political
analyst and journalist Akiva Elder warm
welcome to you all gentlemen AKA let's
start with you um we got some idea from
Laura's report there but why the calls
for an ear early election why are people
so dissatisfied with the current
government are are those calls likely to
be heed is the government under any
obligation to bring forward the date of
a general
election uh it's hard to uh decide where
to start Aran first of all uh your
reporter just mentioned uh the
protest that started a year ago over the
judicial reform now uh nobody still
until this very moment promised us that
this is over this uh uh attempt to uh
actually undermine the pillars of the
Israeli democracy number two it's uh
very clear now to uh most of the
Israelis that Nan is a burden they
believed for many years um I think that
uh the the wakeup call started with his
trial with the scandals that uh
surrounded him in h
2018 and it seems that since then uh
it's all about his own political freedom
and political future uh personal freedom
and political future you know his trial
is uh still continuing um he will
probably be subpoena will have to
testify and uh there are more and more
Israelis who think that netan has
taken 10 million Israeli hostage and
he's willing to undermine our
relationship with the United States he
wants to gain time to wait until the
American elections maybe president Trump
will will save him and uh what's
happening now is netan is using the uh
anxiety after October 7th over security
over uh the need for Unity and the
person who is a master of incitement it
is the middle name is now bringing
incitements even against the families of
the Israeli captives and is dividing
Israel between two camps one Camp
believes that the lives of the captives
is more important than anything else and
netan is responsible for what happened
to them in October and netan has to do
everything to bring them back home and
the other camp that uh is mainly Nan's
fans in the media in the
Coalition is inciting against against
those families telling us the story that
uh they are actually undermining his
attempt to a total Victory to win this
war against the Hamas so now you can see
in Israel two separate camps that have
very little in common given us a lot to
to chew over there AKA tab Abu Ras um
let's start with with with those claims
that Netanyahu is continuing the war in
order to to stay in power and delay his
trial for fraud and bribery how credible
are are those claims and how has the war
changed Israeli
politics yes the war has had an impact
extreme impact on the Israeli Society
it's a but still it's a wake up call for
the Israelis to reconsider their
political Paradigm still the Israeli
Society enlarg in a post trauma it
cannot believe that it's happened H
after all we are talking about the
longest war the most expensive war in
the same times the most divisive war and
now there is a confrontation with the
International Community Israel in large
it's in a very bad shape right now and
this is why Netanyahu lived with very
extreme uh rightwing even racist
Coalition uh
without the Israeli
public several segments
are they are not with netan not
supporting the government yet they are
supporting the ER the release of the
hostages so the right now I believe that
net
is put in the between the Rock and the
Hardy place in one hand he's is looking
for an achievements in Gaza but this war
H it's not it's not bringing any
achievements almost any achievements in
Gaza on the other hand we can see that
the killing the civilians atrocities
that is committed every day in Gaza it's
really bringing more International
pressure on Israel and also now from The
Alliance United States and European
countries and also the now the icj I I I
we have to witness that we see that
there is a kind of pressure internal
pressure within the Israeli Society is
built up right now but it's still it's
so small we don't see the demonstration
in t Aviv it's really it's far from
being the or to compare it them with the
demonstration took place prior to the
7th October but I believe this will
build up and the changing the change of
political leadership in Israel is
imminent Oren ziv uh he's survived many
previous predictions of his downfall if
there were an election in Israel today
would you bet money on Netanyahu not
being prime minister afterwards senior
members of his own party says that he
won't but you can't put anything past
him can
you yes exactly I think this is exactly
the reason and netan is aligning to the
extreme right to benar and
smri because in the beginning people
thought when guns and more Centrist
figures joined this government they
thought it's for Netanyahu to promote a
deal that we knew that the extreme right
would not support that we include the
release of Palestinian political
prisoners so the family of the hostages
and other members of the public had a
hope that the fact that guns and Isa
Isen cot are in the government could
affect netan to go to the Ste and to
give him some Support also laid
announced that he would support from
outside this kind of deal but now it
seems that netan understand that if
there's a hostages deal the extreme
right will leave the government and
maybe later also Ben Gans after the deal
is completed so he decided to align
completely to the extreme right talking
about the fact that only military force
would release the hostages something
that hasn't proved itself in the the
last 130 days and it seem Nan is
insisting not going to elections and
just dragging the next two years with
his extreme Partners on the other side
of course we have the protest yesterday
there was the biggest protest so far on
10,000 people we have to understand that
the isra Republic is still in in shock
and many people felt uncomfortable to
protest during war but as they saw netan
is going back to dealing with local
politics and survival mode they thought
it's a time to go out not only for the
hostages but also to demand the
government to resign and as as I see
this those protests will also grow and
what we're hearing from sources in the
police in the Tel Aviv police is that
this time they will not allow and we've
seen it yesterday they will not allow
blocking of the highway or marches and
so on so also yesterday we've seen some
small clashes but as I understand the
police is trying to align with Minister
Ben and and show that they are loyal to
him will not allow the mass blockades
we've seen a year ago AA um Tabet
touched upon uh the makeup of of
netanyahu's Coalition uh government at
the moment the most right-wing in
Israel's history to what extent is he
being constrained right now by his
Coalition Partners in his decision
making on the war what do those parties
want especially those those two small
far-right parties could they actually
bring down the Netanyahu government if
he agrees to anything that they don't
like actually he made the decision that
uh uh he is willing to confront the
International Community to say no to the
president of the United States who has
his own domestic challenges as we know
and uh just this morning few hours ago
he passed a resolution in the cabinet
that is a clear message to the United
United States saying mind your own
business Israel is not willing to hear
about a two-state solution or a
Palestinian State um and what he's
trying to do right now is to dictate a
new kind of message to the campaign he's
actually in the campaign right now we're
talking about the uh protest in the
street he started while he's calling for
Unity
and this is not the time for elections
and this is time to hold hands um he is
telling us that he is the only one who
can stop and uh undermine any attempt to
force a two-state solution and we know
the Paradigm that uh President Biden has
put already on the table uh not formally
but it's a Palestinian State it's peace
with Saudi
Arabia and it comes also with a deal to
release the hostages and a ceasefire in
Gaza so what Netanyahu is doing he is
not willing to give a green light to the
deal with the Hamas over the hostages
he's not willing to give a deadline to
the war he is refusing to put forward
any exit strategy and uh uh let's see
what the
Israeli uh Civil Society will say
because he's got his 64 block the CET is
also taken hostage by him by the
government uh guns is in kind of Catch
22 uh he's doomed if he stays he's
doomed if he leaves in the time of War
actually the polls
I'm sorry I'm sorry to I'm sorry to
interrupt you AA but I just you you
picked up on on on on something there uh
when you said that that Netanyahu is is
refusing to make a decision to what
extent is that actually politically very
clever in uh by deciding uh or by not
deciding he's actually deciding by uh
remaining ambiguous and letting it drag
on that actually benefits him
politically yeah it uh it seems that his
polls are showing that uh the Israelis
are very concerned about the the even
possibility that there will be a
Palestinian state next door in Gaza in
the West Bank East Jerusalem Ramadan is
coming and uh people are talking about
escalation between Israelis and
Palestinians what he's doing best is
playing the Zero Sum game what's good
for us must be bad for the Palestinian
and vice versa and this is working so I
wouldn't rush to bury him uh if the
issue will be Palestinian state or not
and guns uh and even lapid are know
about it they didn't say that they
support the uh blueprint of President
Biden because it's not popular
Palestinian State and netan is putting
himself he did it with Iran and you know
how he ended but he uh has a very good
record in uh destroying any hope for
even negotiations on a two-state
solution tabas picking up on on what AKA
was saying there U when he was quoting
uh Netanyahu speaking on on Saturday the
last thing we need right right now is
elections we need Unity right now if
there's one thing Hamas would like it's
a political fight which would further
divide his Israelis he said Israel will
not agree to hamas's terms for a
ceasefire and hostage swap he called
them insane but does the Israeli
electorate agree with
him well you know it's very important
just to focus in the issue that Israeli
society as a whole Israeli political M
doesn't have a clear Visions they have
several challenges a challenge of lack
of leadership in Israel H and Second
Challenge the peace Vision I believe
that Israel doesn't have a clear
strategy regarding the Palestinian
people and what to do with the
territories accept to manage the
conflict and to try to change reality on
the ground and even if we change nany
and I believe that 2024 will will will
will be an election national election
and the I believe that Gans will be the
leader of the the coming leader actually
to replace Natan however Gans will build
a a Unity Coalition that consist of the
liid party the haric party haric Al
parties rightwing and left wing because
the Israeli society as a whole need
needs a a Unity the the issue of unity
is so important for Israeli so that I
believe that what we need really a
vision for peace I think Israel should
rush to join the International Community
and to try to offer a hope for the
Israelis not only for the Palestinians
and to go for a real peace with the
Palestinian it's now or never I believe
that is the survival of the state of
Israel depends on peace and leaving
aside Jewish Supremacy in out of the
region okay so in Israeli conduct
actually should be more respectful to
the Palestinian to the issues and should
return to the Saudi initiatives peace
initiatives this is the right thing to
do unfortunately there is no real
leadership in Israel that can adopt the
Saudi Sai PE initiative right now even
if the government support that just
before I put that to orand Tabet briefly
tell us how powerful a Lobby uh the Arab
Israeli vote is voters are there in
Israel
yes I think it's very powerful we are
consist of 20% of the total population
and we can we are in favor of political
partnership we would like to to be part
of the political process in Israel and
the nobody can benefit from peace
between our country Israel and our
people the Palestinian more than us I
believe that we are paying a double
price being Israelis Israeli citizens
and being Palestinians
in during the last few actually months
during the war we we were silenced by
the Israeli system and we are
interrogated so this is why we would
like to be part of any anti nany
government we would like to be part to
overthrow the current government yet we
are really concerned about the future
government hopefully will be a peaceful
government that will go for peace and
make peace with our people the
Palestinians all right picking up on
what tabat aburas was saying there the
survival of Israel uh depends upon peace
is that something that that the the
Israeli electorate would agree
with so unfortunately the vest majority
of the public supports the war a lot of
them consume only Israel media so
they're not really aware of the horrific
reality in Gaza the casualty the
devastation the the all the Gaza Strip
that is destroyed literally destroyed I
do think that if there is some hope is
the fact that the protesters we through
yesterday in the street and they're not
against the world they're against the
government some of them are talking
about the the lack of speaking about the
day after Netanyahu refuses and his
Coalition refus totally to speak about
the day after what will happen and some
in inside the protesters against the
government you have a small group that
has of radical leftwing Israelis the
Jewish Israelis who've been protesting
since they won against the war against
the genocide against the massacre and
maybe a Connecting Point between this
small group and the vast majority of the
Protestant that are calling for election
against netan is this idea that
Netanyahu and his coalition refus to
take talk about day after and and and
the public even the leftwing Centrist
public who come to this demonstration
even if they don't openly oppos the war
they do understand that there has to be
some solution some diplomatic or
political solution that Nan and his
Coalition are refusing to speak about
and this might give some hope for a
political change a we've got just a few
minutes left what will post Netanyahu
politics in Israel look like will there
do you think be radical change uh after
this war and everything that the country
has been through or would it be more of
the same led by different
faces actually Adrian it's very easy
just uh look at uh the uh political map
and uh the Israeli policy uh on the
regarding the conflict palestini Israeli
conflict the year before headed by
Bennett and laid the Israeli public I
think is more mature than uh the leaders
as tab just said I think that uh the
mass majority of the Israelis understand
that we must reach an end to the
conflict and end of War how many more
Wars can we handle um but uh even if you
look at uh the possibility of a
government led by guns on his right
there are people who bypass nanal from
the right like gon who were part of the
liud and the radical part of the leud so
I I believe that the Israeli Peace camp
and the Palestinian peace camp both in
Israel and in the occupied territories
will have to work very hard to make a
difference it's not just changing the
leadership it's changing the priorities
the agenda and the the moral of the
Israelis Tabit I've got about two
minutes left I need a very brief answer
for you because I want to hear a little
bit more from aurin to you were you were
nodding vigorously
there yeah well I I I second akba I
agree with akba but still I think we
need International Help without
International help I don't want to use
the word impose but I think to pressure
Israel to try to obey the first of all
the international law it's so important
to stop this messy War killing civilians
every day and also to try to come up
with
a a solution peace solution that that
based on the establishment of the
Palestinian independent and sovereign
state alongside Israel I know that netan
is in a battle of survival but he will
lose everything Ain very briefly final
word from you are these are these
protests you think set to grow in the
coming
weeks definitely they're going to grow
they're going to get bigger as as we've
seen in the past they're going to meet
with police
brutality police repression and this
will encourage more people to go out and
and join them and hopefully also to
relate to the war itself and not only to
the elections and against netan there
gentlemen I'm afraid we must end it many
thanks indeed to you all for taking part
today Orin ziv tabat aburas and AKA
Eldar thank you for watching you can see
the program again at any time by going
to the website it's al.com for further
discussion you're welcome to join us at
our Facebook page you'll find that at
facebook.com AJ insidestory and of
course you can join the conversation on
X our handle there at AJ inside story
from me Adrien finegan and the team here
in Doha thanks for watching we'll see
you again bye for
[Music]
now